Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today it’s part
two of our three-part mini-series on
the loose theme of “words and language”.
In part one, as our first episode of
2026, we talked about words of the year.
Next up, in part three, we are going
to be talking about the unusual word
“enshittification”, and today, in
part two, we’ll talk about euphemisms.
What are they, where do they come from,
why do we use them, what do they tell
us about the English language, what
are some of the euphemisms you need
to know, and what are some unusual
euphemisms used by British newspapers to
say what they are too afraid to print?
So, let’s not waste a minute
and get right into it.
An oft-repeated criticism of
English speakers is that we
don’t always say what we mean.
On one level, it’s an odd criticism;
language exists as a means of
communication, with the primary purpose
of allowing one person to understand what
another person wants them to do or think.
So why is it that English speakers
don’t always say what they mean, that
we disguise our language, that we
choose a more complicated expression or
phrase, when there is a perfectly good,
common word that we could use instead?
Why do we say “she is no longer with
us”, or “she passed away”, or “he is
with his family now”, when what we
really mean, and what would be an easier
thing to say, is “he or she is dead”?
Well, this is the language of
euphemism, the idea that we use a word
or expression to replace another that
might be uncomfortable or offensive.
Euphemisms, as you might know, exist
in almost every major language.
Humans are humans, and there are
certain subjects, no matter where you
come from, that are deemed difficult
to address using direct language.
Some languages use them more than others;
Japanese, for example, uses lots of
euphemistic language, which is all tied
to its cultural importance on harmony,
politeness, and avoiding embarrassment.
If you’ve spent time in Japan or have
Japanese colleagues, you may have
noticed that people often avoid saying
a direct “no”; instead, they will often
say something like “it would be a little
difficult” or “I will think about it”.
The meaning is the same —“no” —but in some
contexts it would be considered impolite.
It’s a similar thing
in some parts of China.
I remember teaching English in
China one summer during university,
along with a group of Americans.
There were two Chinese ladies in charge
of the group, and, to put it mildly, one
of them didn’t do a particularly good
job, and I’m 99% sure she was fired.
One day, after a particular mishap,
she just didn’t turn up for work.
Instead of being told that she
was fired, we were told that
she was just feeling unwell.
This was quite hard for many of the
Americans to understand, as they just
wanted a “straight”, honest answer,
but they hadn’t understood that
Chinese culture puts a big emphasis on
“face”, and saying that she had been
fired would have been disrespectful.
German and other Nordic languages, as
you may know, tend to be far more direct.
There are still euphemisms, but they
aren’t used nearly as regularly.
And romance languages tend to be somewhere
in the middle—French, Spanish, Italian
—they all use euphemisms, but not quite
to the same degree as we do in English.
So, that brings us to English.
English is actually one of the most
euphemism-rich languages in the
world, and especially in areas such as
death, health, sex, money, and work.
We’ll talk about some specific
examples shortly, but the reason
for this heavy use of euphemisms in
English is partly historical, partly
cultural, and partly psychological.
And this is the case both in
British and American English,
but for different reasons.
British culture has long favoured
understatement and politeness.
There’s a deep-rooted cultural
discomfort with speaking too directly,
especially about unpleasant topics.
This is the case in personal
conversations, conversations between
one person and another, even between
friends and family, but is perhaps
even more so in professional contexts:
workplaces, politics, the news, and so on.
And Americans, despite their reputation
for being outgoing and direct, well,
they are also big fans of euphemisms.
Remember, the United States,
historically at least, was partly a
nation of Puritans, people who set
off from England in search of a purer,
holier life, free from the sins and
blasphemy going on back in Europe.
And in some respects, Americans are even
bigger users of euphemisms than Brits.
Americans talk about using the
“restroom” or “washroom” instead
of saying the word toilet.
In the UK, these expressions are
less common, but you will still find
people typically using euphemisms
instead of saying “toilet”: you
might hear someone saying “bathroom”,
“lavatory”, or “loo” for short.
It might well be a similar thing in
your language: most romance languages
talk about using some variant of
the “bath”, and in Chinese, as
you may know, you say that you are
going to the “wash hands room”.
It's even more removed in Japanese,
where you can talk about going to “pick
flowers”, and as you might know if you’ve
been to Japan, sometimes this euphemism
is taken to an extreme, “real-life”
level, by having toilets that play
bird noises or songs to mask the sound
of what's actually going on in there.
Now, I’m going to try to keep the focus
on English here, to explore certain
English euphemisms, but the reason I
mention these other languages is to
reinforce the point that most languages,
with a few exceptions, just don’t like
talking about certain things: bodily
functions, death, sex and intelligence.
So, let’s take these four
categories one by one.
We’ve already started on the bodily
functions, so let me continue.
Use the restroom, go to the bathroom,
spend a penny, powder your nose, answer
nature’s call, go to the little boys’ or
little girls’ room, use the facilities;
these are all somewhat commonly used
euphemisms to mean “go to the toilet”.
The list of expressions used is sort
of endless, with all sorts of slang
expressions you might hear, but these
are some of the more common ones.
Death is another topic that,
perfectly understandably, most
people find uncomfortable talking
about, so we often use euphemisms
in English when talking about death.
Instead of saying “he died”, we say “he
passed away”, “he is no longer with us”,
“he departed this life”, “he’s at peace
now”, or even “he’s in a better place”.
In formal announcements, you might
read “he succumbed to illness” or
“she lost her battle with cancer”.
You’ll notice that some of these
euphemisms are religious in tone,
with ideas of heaven, peace, and the
afterlife, while others are simply
gentler ways of delivering hard news.
It can feel harsh or too abrupt to
say someone “died”, so we soften
it with more delicate language.
Then we have sex, which is full
of euphemisms, so full, in fact,
that it’s often hard to keep track.
Historically, in British English,
people would talk of someone “lying”
with someone else, or that two
people “lay” together, which was a
particularly polite and indirect way
of saying that two people had sex.
Interestingly enough, “lay” came back
into common usage in the late 20th
century, in a much less euphemistic
way, in the passive form: “to get laid”,
which is a sort of  euphemism for sex,
but not a particularly polite one.
And of course, like most languages, there
are hundreds, thousands of different
ways people might talk about having
sex, of varying levels of politeness,
and with a thin line between what
is a euphemism and what is slang.
Expressions that are more euphemism
than slang might be things like
“sleep with”, “get with”, or even
the more modern “Netflix and chill”.
Now, each of these phrases carries
slightly different connotations — some
are more romantic, some more casual, some
more humorous — but they all serve the
same purpose: to talk about something
considered private or taboo in a way
that doesn’t feel too uncomfortable.
And finally, we come to intelligence.
In English, remarking on someone’s
intelligence, or lack of it, isn’t
a particularly nice thing to do;
it would be quite offensive to say
that someone is “stupid” or “dumb”.
So, to try to convey this in a slightly
less offensive way, there are euphemisms.
You might hear someone say, “he’s not
the sharpest tool in the shed”, or “she’s
not the sharpest knife in the drawer”.
You might also hear “she’s a bit slow”,
or “he’s a few cards short of a full
deck”, or “not playing with a full
deck”, “a little behind the curve”, or
“not the brightest bulb in the box”.
Sure, it still might not be a kind
thing to use these expressions, but it
is, perhaps, less unkind than saying
it directly; these euphemisms  create a
kind of linguistic padding between the
speaker and a perhaps uncomfortable truth.
Now, there are a few other interesting
elements of euphemism to talk about.
The first is something called the
“euphemism treadmill”, which is the idea
that euphemisms change over time, and
with time, they become less of a euphemism
and just another, unacceptable way of
saying what was originally intended.
For example, if we go back to euphemisms
for someone who is not intelligent, 100
years ago, you might have heard people
talking about someone as an “idiot”,
an “imbecile” or a “moron”, as a
then-inoffensive way to address someone’s
intelligence, or perceived lack of it.
With time, those became used as slurs,
offensive terms, so they were replaced
by terms like someone being “retarded”.
That too became a slur, was replaced by
talking about someone having “special
needs”, but this is now increasingly
seen as offensive, and it’s preferable
to talk about someone having an
“intellectual disability”, which, if
history is anything to go by, will
come to be replaced in years to come.
It’s a similar thing with
race in the United States.
In the 19th century, English
used the term “negro”, coming
from the Spanish word for black.
Then came “coloured”, then “black”,
then “African American”, then “person
of colour”, and now the abbreviation
“BIPOC” is more commonly used, meaning
Black, Indigenous, and People of Colour.
So, euphemisms change over time: what
was once the preferred way to talk
about something becomes offensive, and
new euphemisms pop up to replace it.
The final category I want to talk about
is an unusual but funny one, and that’s
euphemisms that are used by the British
press to describe something they want
the reader to understand, but don’t want
to get into legal trouble for printing.
The background to this is that the UK
has very strict libel laws, meaning that
if a newspaper prints something that
accuses someone of having done something,
they need to be able to prove it.
You can’t just print “so and so did
that”; they can accuse you of defamation,
and if you can’t prove it’s true,
they can sue you for a lot of money.
And in 1957, The Spectator
magazine published a story
accusing three Labour politicians
of being drunk at a conference.
They might have looked drunk, but there
was no way for the magazine to prove this,
and it was successfully sued in court.
So, given the frequency with
which it happened, the British
press started to come up with all
manner of different euphemisms for
expressing that someone was drunk.
Most famously, people were
described as “tired and emotional”.
But there was also “worse for
wear”, “under the weather”,
“suffering from exhaustion”, “high
spirited”, or “not quite himself”.
In all these cases, the public
knew what they meant, but if the
newspapers were taken to court,
they could say “hey, we didn’t mean
drunk, we meant tired and emotional”.
Similarly, newspapers might refer to
someone’s “close friend”, “long-time
friend”, or “travelling companion”,
sometimes to mean an extra-marital
lover, or a same-sex companion.
Now, these are just a tiny
selection of the rich tapestry of
English-language euphemisms, and are
meant to give you a small taste of
how and why we use these expressions.
And euphemisms are not fixed, people
invent euphemisms all the time.
They change, they evolve, and you might
hear one you’ve never heard before because
someone just invented it on the spot.
So should you, as a non-native
English speaker, use euphemisms?
Of course, part of anyone’s
fluency journey is learning how
and when to use different registers
of language and expressions.
Learning every euphemism in English
would be an impossible task, so there
is little value in getting caught up in
learning endless lists of euphemisms.
But start to notice them, learn when
native speakers use them, use them
yourself in the same situations, and
nobody will be able to accuse you of not
being the sharpest knife in the drawer.
OK, then, that is it for
today's episode on euphemisms.
I hope it's been an interesting one
and that you've learnt something new.
How many of these euphemisms
had you heard before?
What are some other ones that
you have heard, and how do you
use euphemisms in your language?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
And, as a final reminder, this
is part two of our three-part
mini-series on the theme of “words”.
In case you missed part one, it was
on Words Of The Year, and next up,
in our final part, we’ll be talking
about a word that certainly isn’t
a euphemism: enshittification.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.